is part 10 of the introduction to
astronomy course
and i don't think we've really mentioned
black holes at all so far
so as a good opportunity to
do so and fill you in on what they're
all about
so we start with newton's law of
gravitation
which um he famously um came up with sat
in the garden at woolsthorpe manor um
whilst uh hiding away from the great
plague
that was ravaging the country at the
time he'd returned home from cambridge
to avoid it
and uh saw an apple fall and
presumably bounce on the ground and come
to a stop and realize that something
made it fall and
that would be a force
and that that force could also
account for the moon in its orbit around
the earth
and that the moon was actually falling
around
the earth in the same way that the apple
fell
so you all understand that and you will
appreciate a little bit about gravity
if you uh jump up gravity will pull you
back
down again but is a question that i'm
not going to answer for you i'm going to
let you
think about it what if the earth was
twice as massive
how high would you be able to jump and
uh that's a relatively straightforward
question for
a little bit of mathematics can soon
answer that one
but a more complicated question what if
the earth was squeezed to half its size
but kept the same mass and you were
standing on uh
an earth that had been squashed like
that how high would you be able to jump
then
that's perhaps a little bit more
complicated to answer but
you perhaps you might like to think
about those
and really where i'm going with this is
that
if you jump faster you will jump
higher and the faster you jump the
higher you will go
up to the point where you jump fast
enough that you never come down at all
and this is illustrated here with this
picture of a giant cannon
don't try this experiment at home
they've set the cannon
up on a pedestal on the north pole here
and i fire a cannonball
sideways and it's going to fall to the
earth initially and land in the ocean on
the
path marked slow but if we fired it
with a greater force it would travel
further
and disappear over the horizon and land
somewhere around the earth
but fire it at 17 500 miles an hour
and it will fall towards the earth
in a curve that is the same as the
curvature of the earth so that it won't
actually
hit the ground it will in fact come back
round and hit you in the back of the
head
that's called orbital velocity and the
path is called an
orbit and you have to travel that fast
um just above the earth's surface in
order to achieve that
you're always falling towards the center
of the earth
but the center of the earth direction
keeps changing
as uh the you you move and so
it bends you round into that circular
path
but fire the cannonball even faster 25
000 miles an hour
and it will take a higher trajectory and
in fact
escape forever you've now given it
enough
energy enough initial kick to overcome
the gravity of the earth
completely and fly away out into
deep space and never come back so it's
not
absolutely true that what goes up must
come down
it goes up with enough initial energy it
will escape
the gravity of the earth
however we do have to worry about
the absolute speed limit on the universe
and this goes back to galileo
most of my talks go back to galileo you
may have noticed
the galileo set out to try to measure
how fast light traveled and he had the
idea of sending his assistant
onto a hail top and
armed with a lamp and a cloth and
instructed to uncover his lamp
when he saw galileo's light
so galileo would uncover his lamp
the light would travel to the distant
hilltop and
the assistant would see it uncover his
lamp
then the light from that would travel
back to galileo
and he would cover his lamp up
at which point when the uh
assistant saw the covering up saw the
light disappear
he would cover his up and so forth and
so they would set up a ping pong
of a beam of light traveling between the
two points
and from the round trip delay galileo
thought he would be able to work out how
fast
the beam of light was traveling and
that's entirely
a plausible way of doing it except for
the fact that it's so
fast that human reaction times
would not permit this to work over
such a short distance as between two
hilltops
but galileo didn't give up completely he
concluded that it was
extremely fast and at least
ten times faster than sound because he
was able to do a similar experiment with
making a loud bang
and uh waiting for the returned
bang from the other end measuring the
speed of sound that was
doable with uh human operators
because what he needed was a much longer
baseline
to operate this experiment over um
and really that wouldn't be plausible uh
because it would be very hard to make it
uh
so with an earthly solution
but in uh 50 years later only roma came
along
and had the idea of doing it using the
moons of jupiter and jupiter
as his glamorous assistant and the
covering and
uncovering of the lamp would be replaced
by
the moons of jupiter going into eclipse
into the shadow of jupiter
and so the baseline was from the earth
all the way out to jupiter some
400 plus million miles
so a very long baseline giving him a
effectively a round-trip light travel
delay that was sufficient
to make the measurement and what he did
was measured
the time of the apparent
eclipse starting and ending depend
at different positions on the earth as
it travels around the sun so if the
earth
orbits is this large circle with the sun
in the middle here
then the earth might be at g and c in
eclipse
or it might be at f and see an eclipse
and if you timed the eclipses
they would appear to run late from f
compared to the observations taken from
g
and from that time difference you could
work out how long
it was that the light was spending
traveling from
g to f giving you that extra delay
and he came out with a value as it shows
on the screen that wasn't bad compared
to the modern value
not too far away at all for the speed of
light
now that's a very fast speed but it's
not
infinite it is a finite speed
and therefore um the clergyman
astronomer john mitchell
had the idea about 100 years later
he worked out that if you had a star
that was 500 times
bigger than the sun but in all other
respects
similar just a much larger version
then the escape velocity from the much
larger gravity of this
massive star would be faster than the
speed of light
now i didn't see that as a particular
problem
other than you wouldn't be able to see
the star
because the light would be bent round
and back
into orbit around it or back onto it and
it wouldn't escape so that from a
distance
you would not be able to see the star at
all
and he gave this uh idea the name the
dark star hypothesis
and conjectured that perhaps the
universe was hiding
many of these unseen monsters out there
these
super massive stars and partly that made
sense because
by this stage they'd realized that stars
came in different sizes
and that the largest ones were perhaps a
few hundred
times larger than the sun maybe the
reason for the cut off
at that level was that you just couldn't
see
the larger ones because they were
so big that their escape velocity was
faster than the speed of light
very plausible idea indeed
however we now have to move forward to
slightly more modern ideas 1915
einstein had published his general
theory of relativity which is
his explanation of gravity that gives
slightly different answers to newton's
slightly more accurate ones
with some fairly complicated equations
but
uh karl schwarz child managed to solve
those equations and prove
that if you put enough mass into a small
enough space
then the gravity would indeed be so
strong that the escape velocity would
exceed the speed of light
and came up with a very simple formula
for it called the schwarzschild radius
so if the radius of the body is r and
the mass
is m then two times g
which was the strength of gravity from
newton's equations
divided by the speed of light squared
gives you the radius
so actually two g and c squared are all
constants
so it just said that the radius
was directly related to the mass more
mass
a bigger object um and that radius was
the
size if you squeezed that much mass into
anything smaller than that radius then
the light would not be able to escape
and you would have yourselves what we
now call a black hole
what mitchell would have called a dark
star
and this radius this boundary marks
a position in space time called the
event horizon
and that is called that because nothing
that happens
inside that zone that is closer to the
center than
the smart child radius can ever be
detected
outside no event no light
no matter no radiation can get from the
inside
to the outside you can never find out
what's going on
below the event horizon
and if you crossed inside the event
horizon you could find out
but unfortunately you could never get
back out or send a message back out to
tell anyone
so it would be a bit pointless
now people often ask what happens if you
fall into a black hole
and here we've got a graphic of an
astronaut falling feet first
towards an artist's impression of a
black hole
and as you approach the black hole
gravity gets stronger and stronger
and in fact so much so that your feet
being nearer the black hole will feel a
stronger pull than your head and that
difference
creates a tension in your body your feet
are being pulled harder
than your head and this can eventually
tear you apart
leading to a process called
spaghettification
as you get torn to shreds by the gravity
so i don't recommend trying this
experiment and actually going in there
you probably wouldn't survive even to
find out yourself
what was inside the black hole
but from outside relativity tells us
that something rather surprising
occurs because the light is
climbing out of the black hole
and climbing away from gravity loses
energy
it gets shifted to redder and redder
wavelengths the
deeper towards the black hole it's
emerging in fact
if it emerges from exactly on the event
horizon
it will get red shifted to infinity and
therefore you can't see it at all
and all the energy will be would be used
up in trying to get
from that level outwards
from slightly further out you will get a
very
large redshift and so as bodies
fall towards a black hole they will
appear
redder and redder as the light has to do
more work to climb
away from gravity
and once they reach the event horizon
they disappear completely
but the weirdest thing is that time is
also affected
a clock falling into a black hole will
appear to tick
slower and slower as it falls towards
the event horizon
and in fact as it reaches the event
horizon the image of the clock
will stop and you would not see it
uh continue to tick at all at that point
and this is not
just an artifact this is because the
speed at which
time is running nearer to the
massive object is reduced we see this
even on earth that clocks at ground
level
run more slowly than clocks in orbit for
example
and we have to allow for that with our
satellites for gps
the gps system works by sending atomic
clocks into orbit
and the difference in the time signals
arrival
from several of them you can work out
from that by triangulation where you are
but you have to allow for this time
dilation effect
of gravity causing time to run
slower
sounds fairly crazy well
the question therefore really is are
black holes real
and if so you know how might they come
about
well we think that when extremely large
massive stars run out of fuel at the end
of their life and explode
there's a supernova the core is crushed
down
and if it makes a super dense ball of
matter at the core they can
form a neutron star where all of the
electrons and protons that were making
up the material of the star
get rammed together to form neutrons and
a neutron star might have the mass of
our sun
compressed into something the size of
new york city
as shown in that um artist's impression
of a neutron star in manhattan island
there
and the density of such a thing would be
a billion billion
kilograms per cubic meter so that's
obscenely dense
but we do think we have discovered such
things as neutron stars
uh they create the pulsars that we hear
as
radio blips when the
spinning of the neutron star whips up a
magnetic field
sends out radio waves um and there is
one at the center of the crab nebula
here it is
there's an image of it animated there
and the sound of the pulses coming from
this rotating neutron star
so we're pretty sure that these things
happen
but there is an upper mass limit to the
size
of a neutron star more than about three
solar masses and even the strength of
the neutron matter
that is uh sometimes called neutronium
that neutron stars are made of is such
that gravity
will overcome it and crush the matter
down
to a central point called a singularity
and once that it's crushed down much
beyond the density of a neutron star
then it exceeds the critical density
as in the schwarzschild radius
mata is now so dense that the escape
velocity
from the surface of it reaches the speed
of light and a black hole is born
and so that's where we think they come
from
um and one of the best bits of evidence
for one is
the object that we call cygnus x1
and this was the subject of a bet by
stephen hawking
and another black hole scientist kip
thorne
hawking bet against it being a black
hole as an insurance policy
so that if his life's work on black
holes turned out to be
wasted at least he'd get something out
of it
but eventually stephen hawking signed
off that the bet was lost
and that cygnus x1 is proof of the
existence of black holes
the story goes that in 1964 we detected
strong
x-rays coming from a very compact object
that was no more than 300 kilometers
across
the reason it we know it was 300
kilometers across
is that it was flickering at a rate of
one
per millisecond once per thousandth of a
second
and a thousandth of a light second
a thousandth of the distance that light
can travel in a second
is 300 kilometers and anything that's
going to change its state
inside a millisecond can't be more
than one light millisecond
across because something's got to
coordinate
the actions of one side of it with the
actions of the other side of it so it
all flickers at once
and that can't happen faster than the
speed of light
no no information can be travelling
faster than that
so it's very small indeed and the object
is orbiting around a much larger
blue white giant star and
what we think is happening is that its
strong gravity of this
object is sucking material from the
giant star
into an accretion disk whirling around
and spiraling in and falling into the
central black hole
getting very very hot in the process
giving off x-rays
so that accounts for the x-rays and the
central mass we can work out from the
orbital characteristics
to be just under 15 solar masses and
anything
with 15 solar masses that is 300
kilometers in diameter must be a black
hole
according to that schwarzschild radius
law
again so it has to be um
and that hence the hawking lost his
his bet against the existence of black
holes
we also see evidence that there's a
supermassive black hole
in the center of our galaxy got a
picture of the galaxy
laid out across the top of the screen
there for you
and zoomed right in there is a picture
from
x-rays of the hot gas and a
hot star cluster right in the center of
the galaxy there called sagittarius a
star
and we think that this is again a disc
of matter
that is falling in towards this
supermassive black hole right in the
center
we can actually zoom in a bit further on
that star cluster
and then get an x-ray close-up of that
hot
disc of matter right in the center there
here
this looks like an accretion disc
getting hotter what we can't do
is see the black dot in the center that
ought to be there for the black hole we
don't really have the
resolution on that yet but
still very good strong evidence that
there is
a black hole there
furthermore we can chart the orbits of
some stars in that in our star cluster
that are orbiting round something that
we can't see
marked with the red cross there is the
location
of the center of the orbits of these
various stars
that you can see being plotted out over
a number of years
and what we can tell
from the orbits of these stars like the
one that's doing a complete ellipse here
we can work out using kepler's laws of
motion
that work everywhere they work for
planets
orbiting stars but they also work for
stars
orbiting other objects and we can work
out that there must be
four million solar masses of material
at point x in the center there
we can also see just how close to point
x
some of those stars are going
particularly this one on the long thin
orbit from the top left coming in now
it goes very very close indeed as it
whips past
and that puts an upper size limit on
the object round about the
same size as the solar system around
about the size of the planet uranus is
orbit
and the only way you can pack four
million solar masses of material
into a sphere that is no larger than
uranus's orbit
is for it to be a black hole again using
that schwarzschild
relationship so very very strong
evidence indeed
for one of these really massive black
holes four million
times uh bigger than the uh
the mass of the sun many many times
larger than
the ordinary sized black holes that are
created in supernovae
and we think every galaxy has one of
these in the center
and if we could look at it it would
probably look something like this with
the black hole
black in the middle whirling accretion
disk around it
and probably magnetic fields getting
whipped up to create
beans of material coming out along the
spin axis
of the system with a hot spot of a
corona here
giving off x-rays and we think we've
detected the
x-rays from the corona and even the
reflection of the corona off the disc
and other features so we're very very
confident about these
now we think our our black hole in the
center of the
milky way in sagittarius a star was
feeding
about six million years ago it isn't at
the moment there's not much material
actually falling in right now
but a burst of material was being
devoured by it
about six million years ago and the
evidence is these two
huge plumes of hot gas
and we're talking very hot gas at tens
of thousands or millions of degrees
centigrade and that's the result of
those jets of material
shooting out along the north and south
spin axis of the black hole
pushing this very high the energetic
material
out into these two enormous so-called
fermi bubbles
above and below the galaxy that we've
detected
other evidence is the discovery in the
1950s
of quasars these quasi-stellar
objects quasi-stellar because they
looked like a point-like source
like a star does and not a large diffuse
object like a galaxy
but they had very peculiar spectrum
and eventually were determined to be
at enormous distances across the
universe
the one shown here that looks like a
very very bright star
is actually nine billion light years
away and the light has traveled for
two-thirds of the age of the universe to
get to us
and in the process been stretched by the
expansion of the universe that's gone on
during those nine billion years and
shifted
all of the familiar features of the
spectrum out
down into the infrared which was why it
was hard to recognize
what these objects were to begin with
but we think that the
power that is driving these quasars
to be so bright to be visible at such
great distances
must be again a black hole with an
enormous accretion disk that is
actively feeding the black hole and
firing the jets of material
out and this seems to have been much
more common
in the early stages of galaxy formation
because quasars
all seem to be lit up very distant away
from us
in the dim distant past if you like and
that the
more modern era doesn't seem to have so
many active galaxies
and therefore these quasars don't exist
in the modern universe and of course the
modern universe is the bit that we see
that's nearby to us
because the light travel time is much
shorter
we've also detected evidence of black
holes
through their mergers this is an
artist's simulation of a pair of black
holes orbiting around each other
and eventually merging and
very realistically showing how the
gravity of the
black holes as they spin around will
distort
the passage of light from the universe
behind them and create these rings and
ripples in the distortion
of the image that we see
now as these objects spiral towards each
other
they're losing energy and that energy is
being carried away
in the form of gravity waves and we know
that these are
happening because we've detected these
gravity waves
on earth it was one of einstein's last
predictions
from general relativity to be confirmed
that
such spiraling objects would create
gravitational waves
in the fabric of space-time and this
is one of a pair of observatories
the laser interferometer gravity wave
observatories
in the united states there are several
others operating now
and these have two huge four kilometer
long
tunnels that contain laser beams
bouncing up and down
the tunnels measuring the distance
effectively measuring the light travel
time
of the laser beam up and down the tunnel
it goes up and down many times to create
the effect
of a very very long tunnel and
if a gravity wave passes through the
observatory
it will stretch and shrink the arms
so the light travel time will be
perturbed
but because they're at right angles to
each other it will stretch one and
shrink the other
in an oscillating pattern backwards and
forwards
and that was detected a few years ago
now
and you can see that oscillating trace
here from the two observatories one in
hanford
and one in livingston and we've overlaid
the two on top of each other to show you
that they really do match up
now if you listen you'll hear that there
it is
as a tone so it's been converted to an
audio
tone let's listen again
that noise is the audio signature
of the gravity wave of one black hole
merging with another one
and disappearing and these two black
holes had
around about 30 solar masses
and about 20 solar masses and they
created a 45
solar mass black hole with about five
solar masses being radiated away
as energy having been converted from
mass to energy
effectively released the energy um via
e equals mc squared and to
be carried away by the gravity waves and
detected as these faint ripples
in space-time by us many billions of
years
later but perhaps the best
evidence for their existence is this
this
is the image of the black hole
in the middle of the galaxy messier 87
this is m87 imaged in visible light over
here
it's a giant elliptical galaxy about 50
million light years from earth
at the center of the virgo cluster of
galaxies
which is the local cluster that
we are being drawn towards by gravity
um you can see a jet of material here
shooting out of the center which is
coming from
the black hole in the middle here and a
collection of radio telescopes
all over the world were linked together
to create the sharpest
highest resolution photograph in the
history of man
and it's this one this is the black hole
in the center
here is the accretion disk with the
characteristic brightening on the
foreside
darkening on the far side caused by the
effects of relativity
and even a hint of the jets emerging
from the spin axis there
sort of different orientation to this uh
picture which is why the jets are
pointing in different directions so we
are pretty sure
that such things exist
now i mentioned um
a few famous names so far newton and
einstein of course
but we can't really talk about black
holes without talking about this man
and for the second part of this talk i'm
going to
cover what stephen hawking had to say
about
black holes and use as a guide
uh the book that he wrote
which everybody's got on the shelf a
brief history of time
but a word about stephen first born in
studied physics at some other university
and then came to cambridge in 1962 to 64
for his postgraduate studies to do his
phd
and not very long after that you can see
some 15 years later he had
progressed very rapidly as still quite a
very a young man
to be lucasian professor of mathematics
at cambridge
and that is a very prestigious post
previously occupied by sir isaac newton
so uh no mean feat
but stephen really came to everyone's
attention all over the world
with this book and i've listed the
chapters here
because i'm going to use that as a guide
to tell you
what stephen really had to say
now there was also a movie entitled
the theory of everything in which eddie
redmayne did a fantastic job of
portraying stephen
and told the story of his life and his
family
but didn't say very much about the
theory that
uh would be the uh obvious thing as the
title of a film called the theory of
everything
and the reason for that is that stephen
didn't really come up with
a theory of everything it's not actually
very well
um very very accurately titled even if
it's a
very commonly referred to as what
stephen was really working
towards he was working towards it but he
never got there
here's a just a picture of stephen in uh
the zero g
vomit comet plane as they call it having
a great time
floating free of his wheelchair um and i
just
put that in because it simulates zero
gravity
by taking a path that a falling object
would take
and demonstrates that inside the plane
you can't tell the difference
between acceleration and gravity
because they are one and the same thing
in fact and that was the great
realization of einstein
that led him to put together the general
theory of relativity
so what was it that stephen said that
actually made him so famous well
it's actually in chapter seven of his
book
we've talked about what black holes are
and the evidence for them
which is in chapter six and some of our
other
lectures have talked about the universe
and the expansion of the universe so
chapters one to three but we're going to
take a look
first at this uh chapter seven but in
order to do so
there are a couple of holes that we need
to fill in
we need to look at chapter four to
this uncertainty principle and
understand that and we're also going to
need to understand
a few other things so the uncertainty
principle comes from one of the other
great theories of physics which is
quantum mechanics
and this is a picture of werner
heisenberg he formulated the uncertainty
principle which
really says you can never know
everything
about any quantum system there is a
fundamental limit
to how much information you can have no
matter how
good you think you might make your
instruments
there's an absolute fundamental physical
law
that stops you knowing everything in
particular
there are pairs of quantities that are
linked together
such that knowledge about one is
related to uncertainty in the knowledge
of the other one
in other words the better you know one
of the quantities the less
you can ever know about the other one
and this is most famously
written like this and what it's really
saying
is that x is the position of some
particle
and p is the momentum in other words how
fast it's moving times its mass
and the deltas there mean the
uncertainty so the uncertainty in
the position and the uncertainty in the
momentum
if you multiply those two uncertainties
together
you will always get a number that's
bigger
than the bit on the right which is h
eisenberg's uncertainty constant
and that divided by 4 pi
but h is as it says a very small number
so we don't notice
this in everyday life we can make very
very accurate measurements
indeed and not trip over this
uncertainty principle
but eventually it comes along and stops
us
at a fundamental limit for the amount of
knowledge
we can gain and for a particle like an
electron in an
atom it certainly does uh
affect things it means that the better
you know the position of the electron
the
less well you can possibly know it's
speed
so as soon as you've tracked it down to
a particular spot
it's off at some indeterminate speed to
somewhere else
which isn't really very helpful if
you're trying to model what's going on
but it can be reformulated from this
x and p formation into a different
uh combination of variables we can use
energy and time
and this is very very important to the
story of black holes and stephen hawking
because
what it says is that for short periods
of time
the where delta t is very small
the energy delta e ends up being very
uncertain you've got a very large
energy uncertainty over very short
periods of time and this means that
the fundamental law of the conservation
of energy
in energy can be can't be destroyed or
created it can only be converted
from one form to another they teach us
at school
well that's not quite true
it's true on average over the long run
in any sensible period of time but on
these incredibly
short time scales that occur inside very
small systems like atoms the
time scales involved can be so small
that the uncertainty in
what the error is of the energy is
allowed to be can be very large
essentially you can violate the
constellation of energy
as long as you don't do it for very long
you can borrow
a bunch of energy from nowhere and pay
it back quickly enough
and the great cosmic accountant will be
happy
a bit like having an overdraft at the
bank as long as you don't have it for
too long no one will catch you
um but it also means
that something very fundamental about
empty space
because if you had a piece of space with
absolutely nothing in it no particles no
radiation
nothing no energy at all
it would have zero energy and if it has
zero energy then we know the energy
precisely
and that cannot be because it would
mean that the error in delta t
had to be infinite in order to be larger
than
h over four pi
a very very curious thing
now we also need to understand just for
the purposes of this
that the matter that we see around us is
made with
positively charged protons in the
nucleus
and negatively charged electrons
orbiting around
inside atoms this is hydrogen with just
one of each
more complicated elements have more but
they're nevertheless
positive protons in the middle and in
orbiting negative electrons
to cancel out the electric charge but
there is another type of matter
in the universe called antimatter
where you have negatively charged
anti-protons in the center
and positively charged anti-electrons
orbiting round and we can make this
stuff
in the lab it really can be produced
not by more than a few atoms at a time
but we can make it
makes it the most expensive material on
earth
but if the two get together the
matter and antimatter cancel out and
all of the energy is released the mass
is destroyed and converted into energy
as a huge blast of energy
it's one of the most powerful explosions
you could ever make
by combining mata and antimatter
but in fact the way we make antimatter
is we run that
backwards we take energy smash it
together
and get mata and antimatter an electron
and an anti-electron sometimes called a
positron
out we can do that by colliding
a pair of get high energy gamma rays or
a pair of high energy protons it doesn't
really matter what
the energy can come out as matter and
antimatter
and indeed this this particular process
happens high in the earth's atmosphere
where gamma rays produce
showers of electrons and anti-electrons
and it happens in the center of galaxies
around massive stars all sorts of places
where antimatter gets produced
but if we take the idea of antimatter
and the idea of
empty space and the heisenberg
uncertainty principle
together what we find is that
if empty space had exactly zero energy
it would violate that uncertainty
principle
and to avoid that it doesn't have
exactly zero energy what happens is that
it seeds with
pairs of short-lived matter and
antimatter particles
that pop into existence kind of wave at
us and then
annihilate again and pay the energy back
so energy is borrowed from space-time as
the particles appear
and then they annihilate again and pay
it back
so in the long run energy is conserved
but
on average there is a net positive
amount of energy
in the form of the the two particles
that have popped up
and so empty space is never really
completely empty and that's how it
avoids
violating the uncertainty principle
this sounds crackers but we've measured
it in the lab
the uh casimir effect was predicted by
hendrick casimir in 1948
which is if you put two electrically
conducting metal plates
in a vacuum then put them very close
together
what you find is that the range of
possible
particle energies that can exist
between the plates is constrained by the
very narrow
gap to fewer states
than are possible outside the plates
and therefore you get
more of this vacuum energy outside the
plates than between them
and it creates a pressure forcing the
plates together
and we can actually measure this
pressure on these plates
and if you put a couple of metal plates
about 100 atoms
width so 10 nanometers apart in a vacuum
then you can measure that pressure and
it comes to a pressure about one
atmosphere
so it's a physically measurable quite
large effect
and it's responsible for sticking
molecules together sometimes and
other interactions that go on in the
real world
all caused by this uncertainty principle
demanding that empty space never be
truly empty
so what stephen hawking did was realize
that if this happens
out in space near a black hole perhaps
you're a little bit away from the black
hole
and a pair of particles appear
and then recombine and pay back their
energy
that's all fine but if it happens right
up close to the event horizon of our
black hole here
one of the particles say the blue one
here can
fall into the black hole past the event
horizon and be trapped and lost forever
and if that happens its partner now has
no one to annihilate with
and so it uh just drifts away
and becomes a real particle
and the reason it's allowed to become a
real particle
is that the
energy debt that the two particles were
required to repay to the universe
for their own creation gets paid
by the fact that the blue
particle has fallen down this gravity
slope energy is released from gravity
as it falls in and that energy is used
to pay back the energy necessary to
create
both the particles and so there's no
longer any need
for this particle to annihilate and the
red one can escape
and that escaping particle comes away
from just outside the surface of the
black hole
and we call it hawking radiation
and what hawking did in his uh 1970
i think it was paper was
publish this idea of hawking radiation
and calculate just how much of it there
would be
and showed that a black hole
would emit this radiation from just
outside its
event horizon so it's not coming from
inside
that's not allowed it's coming from just
on the edge and
outside where these uh particles get
created
and don't then re-annihilate and they
come away and they
look like they're coming from the black
hole and he calculated exactly how much
of this there would be
and worked out therefore that a black
hole would have
a positive temperature and we could
predict the temperature of this
radiation that they would create
and what made him famous and got in the
appointment of professor
was that this was the first time
that three fundamental branches of
physics had been joined together
successfully
general relativity gravity and black
holes
combined with quantum mechanics the
uncertainty principle
and all of the statistical mechanics
that tells us how temperature is created
along with thermodynamics the the study
of heat and temperature
all three of those were used in his
paper to produce this
and the maths worked and came up with
answers that didn't blow up in your face
uh as infinities which all previous
attempts had always done
so that was truly groundbreaking and a
step towards
combining those ideas those three
pillars of modern physics into a theory
of everything perhaps
it's not there yet but it was the first
step
now the fact that these black holes are
emitting or appearing to emit
this hawking radiation from just outside
the
event horizon means that overall
energy is escaping from somewhere
and it is in fact the gravitational
energy of the black hole
that is paying the energy bill
to have all of this radiation created
remember i said it's the rolling
downhill of the in-falling partner
particle
that releases gravitational energy and
in fact a black hole is just a ball of
gravitational energy
and so gradually the black hole loses
energy
and if it loses energy because e equals
m c
squared it loses mass and so gradually
the black hole
will become less and less massive
so eventually they will evaporate
completely
and this is called hawking evaporation
now it's a rather unexpected result that
comes from
looking at hawking evaporation is that a
large black hole
will have a uh
be out here on this diagram a very
massive black hole
has a very gentle slope of gravity
near the event horizon it doesn't change
very fast
so the gravity is is getting stronger as
you get closer but the difference over a
meter is
relatively weak in fact if you're going
to choose a black hole to fall into
choose a super massive one because the
gravity slope at the event horizon is
weak enough that it won't spaghettify
you
as you cross the event horizon it'll
spaghettify you later
but at least you'll get a brief chance
to see what's going on
now this means that a particle that
falls into a supermassive black hole
has to fall a very long way to change
its energy
by very much from the effect of gravity
it'll pick up speed rather slowly on the
gentle slope
and so it has to fall a long way
in order to gain enough energy to pay
the bill for its own creation
and that means because it has to travel
a long way
and of course it's limited by the speed
of light
it can't get very
much energy within that delta t
time limit of the uncertainty principle
and so large black holes
find it quite difficult to generate high
energy particles they can
um they they would have to be have the
particles zoom in at nearly the speed of
light
to get a decent distance before the time
limit is up
um and then it's only going to have
gained a small amount of energy from
the uh the change in gravity
small black holes on the other hand are
a different kettle of fish
near a small black hole the event
horizon is very steep
you would get spaghettified before you
even got to the
event horizon so steep is it but that
means that a falling particle doesn't
have to travel very far
to gain enough energy to pay for its own
creation
and so that's a very easy process and
can happen quickly
and certainly can happen within the time
scale
and so what we find is that large black
holes
can only emit very weak low
energy hawking radiation but small black
holes
can emit high temperature high energy
radiation
and in fact must do and so
the defective temperature of a large
black hole is very low
and a small black hole is very
high well that means that a large black
hole is going to lose mass
slowly and a small black hole is going
to lose it very
fast and so as it loses
mass the rate of mass loss gets faster
and faster
in a runaway process until the last
uh fraction of the mass disappears
in a very bright flash of hawking
radiation
in fact for a solar mass black hole we
can work out
that the temperature would be 110
millionth of a degree
so we're never going to detect that for
the hawking temperature
of a solar mass black hole
and in fact that's colder than the
cosmic microwave background radiation
the heat signature left over from the
big bang
so in fact solar mass black holes and
larger ones
have such low hawking temperatures that
the hawking radiation comes out much
more slowly
than cosmic microwave radiation
goes in and so they will gain energy
from the
cosmic microwaves much faster than they
lose energy from
the hawking radiation
and for that reason they won't actually
evaporate at all
okay the energy influx is greater than
the evaporation rate
what you need is a smaller black hole
we took the moon and turned it into a
10 micrometer across object
it would be a black hole with the moon's
mass
crammed into that space and then
the hawking temperature would be quite
high at 2.7
degrees kelvin the same temperature as
the cosmic
microwave background so a moon mass
black hole
would neither evaporate nor gain energy
from the cosmic microwave background
and grow it would stay in balance
so let's make an even smaller one let's
take mount everest
and compress that into a really tiny
black hole
now this would have a high hawking
temperature
and if um the early universe after the
big bang had created
black holes of this sort of mass of a
mountain
then they would have got to the point
now
of being in that last few uh
moments of evaporation as the runaway
process
would raise their temperature and they
would get hotter and hotter and
evaporate faster and faster
exponentially shrinking and getting
hotter until a
last flash would occur with the power
output
of 10 000 stars a bit like a supernova
um so actually these are a good thing to
go and try and look for
and as searches have been done for
primordial black holes
that might have been created in the big
bang
evaporating around about now at
different distances across the universe
we could see
back different lengths of time and try
and spot these events
and we haven't found any yet but the
search continues
now of course you might remember when
they built the large hadron collider
to smash protons together there was a
worry that
it might make a microscopic black hole
if it crammed enough energy into a
really tiny space
and maybe that black hole would then uh
absorb more material
eat the uh large hadron collider and
then
eat the whole of the earth as it grew
and more material
fell within it well
it didn't and we're still here they did
turn it on obviously
but the hawking's prediction of hawking
radiation
says that such tiny black holes would
evaporate so quickly
they would never make it to the edge of
the container and therefore
it was safe to turn it on
well that's all good but fortunately
again cosmic rays have done the
experiment for us in the atmosphere
so we know that um
such a device wasn't going to create a
black hole or we wouldn't be here
because
cosmic rays would have already done it
now just to finish off i'm going to whiz
through these last little bits
we've talked about uh gravity being
the curvature of space caused by the
mass of an object bending space
and also bending time into
a curved shape around the massive object
and needing to adjust our gps satellites
accordingly and so this sort of picture
emerges
and we can think of a black hole as
a bottomless pit of gravity such that
the
sides get steeper and steeper as you go
towards it
until they become vertical at the event
horizon
and effectively the dip in space
is infinitely deep it's not an entirely
accurate picture but it's a
a tool to think with and so
if that's what a black hole might look
like
what if we took two of them and joined
them
neck to neck like this well that's a
wormhole
you could uh in theory go in one end and
out the other
of such a thing and it would be a tunnel
through space
uh very conveniently might be a way of
traveling to
distant regions of space without all
that tedious interstellar travel that
ryan was talking about
in the previous lecture so instead of
going from earth
all the way around here to this star why
not just punch a wormhole
and connect the two distant regions of
space
with a tunnel and then nip through it to
save all that tedious traveling
well einstein's theory says that such
things are
possible we've not seen one
and perhaps the reason is that despite
the
complicated mathematics what you
actually need to do
is have a ring of material holding the
neck
open and pulling outwards on it
and the only way to do that is for the
the red donuts that you have to put
around the throat of the
wormhole has to have negative energy
in other words negative mass and i don't
mean antimatter
because antimatter has positive mass
just like ordinary matter has positive
mass
and positive energy i mean something
that has less energy
than nothing at all and that may be
not physically possible in which case
wormholes won't happen
but what if we suddenly were doing
another of those event horizon
images of a distant black hole and we
saw
this maybe this would be
a wormhole showing us
a distant region of space imaged
through the tunnel through of the
wormhole
so if instead of seeing a black center
to one of our event horizons we saw a
bright
center maybe it would be a wormhole
and nature's best possible telescope in
fact
for seeing things that could be
immensely far away
in a distant region of the universe
entirely
um and that would be a very exciting
discovery if we uh
were to come up with it so
well worth going and looking for because
maybe nature has found a way to do it
even if we don't think we can at the
moment
but if you could make a warp drive then
you could solve brian's interstellar
travel problem
another way this is an albuquerque warp
drive
which is bending space
creating a negative dip in front of it
and a positive dip behind it
such that the whole thing is going to
sit in a flat bit of space in the middle
and then surf along on this uh
wave in space time
you would progress forwards but you
would not be moving through the space
around you the whole of the space would
be being
compressed in front of you and stretched
behind you
and because you're not moving through
space you're actually warping space
itself
that is not limited to the speed of
light
now again you need negative energy and
negative mass to build
an lb carey warp drive so it's the same
problem as building a wormhole
although recent research has suggested
there might be other
forms of warp drive that don't require
negative mass
so maybe we're inching closer to finding
a way to do this
but if you can build a wormhole or an
albuquerque warp drive
you can build a time machine because
after all it's space
time that we're bending and you can
create
what's called a a closed time-like loop
where you could go in here and come out
in the past and go around again
and and create all sorts of weird
paradoxes
but there's one thing about such
creations
you can never travel back to a time
before the wormhole was created
so maybe the reason we don't see hordes
of
time tourists coming from the future to
see us
yet is because we haven't yet switched
on the first time machine
but the day that you do suddenly the
time tourists will be all over you
and finally just gonna end with
this chapter from uh stephen's book
we've looked at black holes not being so
black
in the last lecture we're gonna have
this series we're gonna talk about the
origin
and the fate of the universe in a talk
called cosmic dawn and destiny
but chapter 9 is very interesting in
that it's
the about the arrow of time which is
really saying
why do we remember the past but not
remember the future
what's different about the future
compared to the past
because all of our equations in physics
have time in them and they all work both
ways
you can run time forwards or backwards
in them it makes no difference
except one
now we know from our studies of
astronomy that we
live in a universe that came from a big
bang
13.8 billion years ago
and if we calculate the radius of a
black hole
using that schwarzschild formula that
contained
all the mass of all the energy of the
whole universe that we know about
that schwarzschild radius comes out to
13.8 billion
light years which is a massive cosmic
coincidence
it's as if the it's telling us that the
whole universe
is in fact the inside of a black hole
so what really goes on inside a black
hole well
as you cross the event horizon space
time becomes so curved
and so curled up that
all possible future paths that you might
take
will converge you as in this image here
onto the singularity your future is
defined
to run you towards the singularity no
matter what direction you're trying to
travel in but once it reaches the
singularity
the curvature of space-time becomes
infinitely curved and
that essentially means that time stops
and there is no after
no future time beyond the end of time
when you reach the singularity there is
no
beyond that point and it is very much
the end of physics as we know it
i say as we know it because we don't
know everything
and einstein's theory of relativity
generates infinities under these
conditions
and that's never good in a mathematical
theory
but if we look back to the big bang
what we are saying about the big bang is
that the universe came from a point
of infinite density of infinite
curvature of space-time
where time started and there was no
before
or beyond that start point and it's the
beginning of physics
this is the opposite statement so in a
black hole
all paths lead to the center where
physics ends and time
stops and
from a big bang all paths lead outwards
from the big bang
away from it and it is the beginning of
time
it's as if the singularity at the
big bang is the opposite of the
singularity
in a black hole in fact
it's as if we've swapped the arrow of
time over
if you take all of those statements you
swap the arrow of time
then what you find is that
all particles begin their existence
from a big bang singularity
and perhaps many of them end their
singularities
in their lives at the singularities
inside black holes
and that maybe time flows from one
singularity to another
for for all of these particles
and it may well be that as i say if you
swap the direction of time over
then the black holes suddenly look like
sources and the big bang looks like the
sink
into which everything flows it is
symmetrical
in that sense but the difference is
that there are there is one
black one singularity for the big bang
and many black holes and that is
creating an unsymmetrical situation
and maybe it is that lack of symmetry
of having one big bang and many black
holes
that leads to the arrow of time seeming
to always point from
the order of one big bang to the chaos
of many black holes where what they say
is entropy
increases as order goes to chaos
so maybe the universe began with a
single highly ordered state in the big